Update Graph Module specification (#1031)
blockprotocol/blockprotocol: apps/site/src/_pages/docs/4_spec/02_graph-module.mdx

# Graph Module

This document (version 0.3) defines a **graph module** according to the terms set out in the [core specification](https://blockprotocol.org/docs/spec/core).

> The graph module describes how **ontology types** and **entities** can be created, queried, updated, and linked together – including the **block entity**, represented by the **properties** sent to the block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The graph module describes how **ontology types** and **entities** can be created, queried, updated, and linked together – including the **block entity** (the entity associated directly with the block).
```

## Glossary

**Entity:** an instance of data, often corresponding to a thing in the world, constrained by a particular entity type.

**Link Entity:** a kind of entity which represents a connection or relation between its left and right entity, constrained by a link entity type.

**Left Entity:** the entity which is on the "left" of a specific link entity, in most situations this can be thought of as the "source" of the link.

> **Right Entity:** the entity which is on the "right" of a specific link entity, in most situations this can be thought of as the "target" of the link.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Right Entity:** the entity which is on the "right" of a specific link entity – in most situations this can be thought of as the "target" of the link.
```

> **Ontology Type:** an element of the Block Protocol Type System, represented as a self-contained schema accessible via a URI. Ontology types are composed together to describe the shape of entities within the graph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Ontology Type:** an element of the Block Protocol Type System, represented as a self-contained schema accessible via a URL. Ontology types are composed together to describe the shape of entities within the graph and the potential links between them.
```

> **Entity type:** an ontology type that defines the structure of an entity and its link entities. An entity type references other entity types and property types.

Reviewer: entity types do not define the structure of an entity's link entities
```suggestion
**Entity type:** an ontology type that defines the structure of an entity, the type of link entities it may be connected to and the type of entities on the other end of those links. An entity type references other entity types and property types.
```

> **Link Entity type:** an entity type which has a special marker to say it constrains a link entity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Link Entity type:** an entity type which has a special marker to say it defines a link entity.
```

Author: Do the types _define_ entities? They don't specify the properties of these things

Reviewer: how about 'describes the shape of' or something? or 'constrains the shape / structure of'?

I just find 'constrains an x' to be less clear than it could

**Property type:** an ontology type that defines the structure of an individual property within an entity. A property type references other property types and data types.

**Data type:** an ontology type that defines the possible space of possible values that an individual property can take within an entity.

**Graph:** a network of graph elements (entities, entity types, property types, and data types) connected by edges.

> 

Reviewer: Vertex? Root?

Author: I was trying to keep the glossary from exploding, but perhaps that's not a good idea. I'm also not entirely sure about the glossary, vs the definitions in the spec below, vs the docs elsewhere.

Happy to add sections if you think it necessary, the `Vertex` bit should mostly be an implementation detail, and the `roots` are explained in the context of the `Subgraph` two paragraphs down.

Reviewer: It's fine without

**Edge:** a directed connection between two graph elements which describes their relationship. Possible edges include those that describe references between types, or the relationship between the left and right entities of link entities.

> **Subgraph:** a specific subset of a graph, usually returned as a result of a query. Can contain a set of roots which are distinguished elements of the subgraph, and usually correspond to the direct results of the query as the subgraph may contain other elements of the graph that were connected to the root elements through various edges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Subgraph:** a specific subset of a graph, usually returned as a result of a query. Can contain a set of roots which are distinguished elements of the subgraph, and usually correspond to the direct results of the query – the subgraph may contain other elements of the graph that were connected to the root elements through various edges.
```

**Block entity**: an entity associated with the specific instance of the block, conforming to block's specified entity type.

**Block Entity Subgraph:** a subgraph which contains the block entity as its root, with connected elements to a given depth.

## The Type System

The data model of the graph module is defined through its **Type System**.

> The type system describes how a graph of **entities** is structured, through a composition of the 3 classes of **ontology types**, **data types**, **property types**, and **entity types**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The type system describes how a graph of **entities** is structured, through a composition of the 3 classes of **ontology types**: **data types**, **property types**, and **entity types**.
```

When composed, these types are capable of describing any JSON object.

### <Hidden>The Type System </Hidden>Data Types

A **data type** describes a space of possible valid _values_.

> These cover all possible primitive values that can be represented within JSON, as well as `Object` and `Null` which are included for completeness of the system ([see the RFC for rationale](https://github.com/blockprotocol/blockprotocol/blob/main/rfcs/text/0352-graph-type-system.md#including-an-empty-list-data-type)).

Reviewer: `EmptyList`? Your href is specifically rleated to it but it is not mentioned here

Author: Oops I wrote `null` instead of `empty list` (`null` is a primitive value after all) 😁 
```suggestion
These cover all possible primitive values that can be represented within JSON, as well as `Object` and `Empty List` which are included for completeness of the system ([see the RFC for rationale](https://github.com/blockprotocol/blockprotocol/blob/main/rfcs/text/0352-graph-type-system.md#including-an-empty-list-data-type)).
```

  "kind": "dataType",
  "$id": "https://blockprotocol.org/@blockprotocol/types/data-type/null/v/1",
  "title": "Null",
  "description": "A placeholder value representing 'nothing'",
  "type": "null"
}
```

#### Object

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://blockprotocol.org/types/modules/graph/0.3/schema/data-type",
  "kind": "dataType",
  "$id": "https://blockprotocol.org/@blockprotocol/types/data-type/object/v/1",
  "title": "Object",
  "description": "A plain JSON object with no pre-defined structure",
  "type": "object"
}
```

#### Empty List

```json
{
  "$schema": "https://blockprotocol.org/types/modules/graph/0.3/schema/data-type",
  "kind": "dataType",
  "$id": "https://blockprotocol.org/@blockprotocol/types/data-type/empty-list/v/1",
  "title": "Empty List",
  "description": "An Empty List",
  "type": "array",
  "const": []
}
```

### <Hidden>The Type System </Hidden>Property Types

A **property type** is the definition of the possible values that can be associated with a **property**.
When represented in JSON schema, a property type satisfies the following meta-schema:

<PropertyTypeMetaSchema />

### <Hidden>The Type System </Hidden>Entity Types

> An **entity type** is the definition of the structure of an **entity**'s **properties**, and its outgoing **link entities** and their endpoint entities.

Reviewer: for clarity, to avoid implying that an entity type defines the structure of its outgoing link entities
```suggestion
An **entity type** is the definition of (1) the structure of an **entity**'s **properties**, and (2) its outgoing **link entities** and their endpoint entities.
```

When represented in JSON schema, an entity type satisfies the following meta-schema:

<EntityTypeMetaSchema />

## Defining blocks

### Block package

#### <Hidden>Block package </Hidden>Summary

> Blocks using the graph module provide an **entity type** which describes the shape of their **block entity**. Embedding applications should use this to constrain the properties they send to blocks when they are instantiated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blocks using the graph module provide an **entity type** which describes the shape of their **block entity**. Embedding applications should use this to constrain the entity they send to blocks when they are instantiated, and the entities which are linked it as part of the block subgraph.
```

The versioned URL of the entity type's schema must be referenced in the block's `block-metadata.json` under a `schema` key.

> Blocks may also add `default` and `examples` keys to `block-metadata.json` to define default and example properties conforming to their schema. If more complex example data is required that involves specifying _other_ entities and link entities between them, which the block will make use of, a block package may also include an `example-graph.json`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blocks may also add an `examples` keys to `block-metadata.json` to define example properties conforming to their schema. If more complex example data is required that involves specifying _other_ entities and link entities between them, which the block will make use of, a block package may also include an `example-graph.json`.
```

#### <Hidden>Block package </Hidden>Specification

##### Blocks

A block using the graph module MAY expand `block-metadata.json` to specify:

- `schema`: the versioned URL of the **entity type** associated with the block entity. As per the specification, the schema hosted at the remote address should not be subject to change and versions of entity types should be treated as immutable, permanently available, records.

> - `default`: an **entity**, conforming to the block’s entity type, representing the default data that applications should provide when creating a block, unless &#40;a&#41; the block can handle being provided no data when first instantiated or &#40;b&#41; `variants` is provided &#40;see below&#41;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- `examples`: an array of objects conforming to the block's entity type which provide examples of the data that can be passed to it

> - `variants`: an array of objects, each with a `name` and `properties`, and optionally `description`, `icon`, and `examples`. These objects represents different variants of the block that the user can create, where `properties` sets the starting properties. As a simple example, a ‘header’ block might have variants with the `name` ‘Heading 1’ and ‘Heading 2’, which start with `{ level: 1 }` and `{ level: 2 }` as `properties`, respectively

Author: @CiaranMn can you help me update this? I'm not entirely sure what it is

Reviewer: I'd update `level` to versioned URIs, it's fine otherwise.

Author: Can we have `properties` though? Presumably the user needs to be able to set both `properties` and `linkData`?

Author: I realise now that setting `linkData` is problematic because you don't statically know the `entityId`.. hm, this might prove troublesome for blocks that have a required link. Something to revisit in the future

Author: ```suggestion
- `variants`: an array of objects, each with a `name` and `properties`, and optionally `description`, `icon`, and `examples`. These objects represents different variants of the block that the user can create, where `properties` sets the starting properties. As a simple example, a ‘header’ block might have variants with the `name` ‘Heading 1’ and ‘Heading 2’, which start with `{ "https://blockprotocol.org/@alice/types/property-type/level/": 1 }` and `{ "https://blockprotocol.org/@alice/types/property-type/level/": 2 }` as `properties`, respectively
```

  If more complex example data is required, a block’s package may also include a file at the root named `example-graph.json`, which MUST be a JSON object, and MUST contain an `entities` key where each element is a JSON representation of an entity which MUST conform to the structure specified in [entity definition](#structure-specification).

##### Embedding applications

> Embedding applications MUST use the constraints set in the associated entity type, to constrain the data it sends to the block in the **block entity subgraph**, assuming the embedding application implements the `blockEntitySubgraph` message.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An embedding application MUST use the constraints set in the associated entity type to constrain the data it sends to the block in the **block entity subgraph**.
```

> Embedding applications MAY choose to display their own UI to allow users to set any values on the block entity described in `configProperties`, and could allow users to set values for them for all blocks of a type (rather than on a per-block instance basis)
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Entity definition

### <Hidden>Entity </Hidden>Structure

#### <Hidden>Entity Structure </Hidden>Summary

An entity is a combination of **metadata** and **properties**.

The **metadata** is a minimum collection of fields that are fixed and specified in this document, although embedding applications MAY choose to add their own.

The **properties** is a JSON object which satisfies the constraints of the entity’s **entity type**.

#### <Hidden>Entity Structure </Hidden>Specification

##### Entities

When embedding applications pass entities to blocks, whether the **block entity** or any other:

- entities MUST be represented by an object, which:

  - MUST contain a field `metadata`, an object which:
  - MUST contain a field `recordId`, an object which:

>     - MUST contain a field `entityId` identifying the entity, which MUST be a string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - MUST contain a field `entityId` uniquely identifying the entity in the application, which MUST be a string.
```

>     - MUST contain a field `editionId` which identifies the specific _edition_ of the entity, which MUST be a string, and MUST be unique for each edition of an entity for datastores that have versioning for their data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - MUST contain a field `editionId` which identifies the specific _edition_ of the entity, which MUST be a string, and MUST be unique for each edition of an entity for applications that have versioning for their data.
```

>   - MUST contain a field `recordId`, an object which:
>     - MUST contain a field `entityId` identifying the entity, which MUST be a string.
>     - MUST contain a field `editionId` which identifies the specific _edition_ of the entity, which MUST be a string, and MUST be unique for each edition of an entity for datastores that have versioning for their data.
>   - MUST contain an `entityTypeId` identifying the entity type the entity belongs to, which MUST be a string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - MUST contain a field `recordId`, an object which:
      - MUST contain a field `entityId` identifying the entity, which MUST be a string.
      - MUST contain a field `editionId` which identifies the specific _edition_ of the entity, which MUST be a string, and MUST be unique for each edition of an entity for datastores that have versioning for their data.
    - MUST contain an `entityTypeId` identifying the entity type the entity belongs to, which MUST be a versioned URL from which a valid entity type schema is retrievable.
```

>   - MUST contain a field `properties` if the block has defined any `required` properties in its schema, and otherwise MAY be omitted. If present, it:

Reviewer: I think our types require this field? we might as well anyway
```suggestion
  - MUST contain a field `properties` which:
```

Author: ` & (Properties extends null ? {} : { properties: Properties })`

They do not, I'd opt to not change this for now to keep the implementation in sync, we can fix in follow up

    - MUST be an object
    - MUST conform to the constraints described by the entity type of the entity

>   - if the entity is a link entity it MUST contain a field `linkData` (and MUST not otherwise), an object which:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - if the entity is a link entity it MUST (and if it is not, MUST NOT) contain a field `linkData`, an object which:
```

    - MUST contain a field `leftEntityId` identifying the left entity of the link, which MUST be a string
    - MUST contain a field `rightEntityId` identifying the right entity of the link, which MUST be a string
    - MAY contain a field `leftToRightOrder` used to order this link entity against other link entities of the same type with the same `leftEntityId`, which MUST be a non-negative integer
    - MAY contain a field `rightToLeftOrder` used to order this link entity against other link entities of the same type with the same `rightEntityId`, which MUST be a non-negative integer

i.e. any entity MUST conform to the following schema:

<EntityMetaSchema />

### <Hidden>Entity </Hidden>Identification

#### <Hidden>Entity Identification </Hidden>Summary

Blocks must pass an `entityId` when making requests in respect of any entity.

> Embedding applications should ensure this is stable and unique for any given entity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Embedding applications should ensure that the `entityId` is stable and unique for any given entity, across any versions of it that may exist.
```

#### <Hidden>Entity Identification </Hidden>Specification

Blocks MUST provide `entityId` when identifying a particular entity for the purpose of **messages** under the graph module.

Embedding applications MUST provide `entityId` for each entity it supplies the block at the root of the entity data object, as described under [Structure](#structure) above.

`entityId` SHOULD be a stable, unique reference to the entity, so that blocks may use it for comparing the identity of entities – i.e. so that blocks can assume that entities with the same `entityId` are the same entity, and that the same entity referenced in different places will have the same `entityId` wherever it appears.

## Subgraph Definition

### <Hidden>Subgraph </Hidden>Summary

Many of the values returned by embedding applications for messages of the graph module include a **subgraph**.

> A subgraph is a data structure which contains elements of the graph, **vertices**, and **edges** which is a precomputed lookup set of the relationships between elements of the graph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A subgraph is a data structure which contains elements of the graph – **vertices** and **edges** – and which provides a precomputed lookup set of the relationships between a subset of elements of the graph. A subgraph is the result of a query for a portion of the graph, and includes the `roots` at which this query begun and the `depths` to which it followed `edges` from them.
```

Author: My previous phrasing was trying to say that the `edges` object is actually the precomputed lookup set. It is redundant because all of the edge information is already encapsulated within the vertices themselves.

Reviewer: I don't feel strongly about it

> Consumers can pass this object to the graph module package's standard library to benefit from implementations of common operations such as getting entities linked to a particular entity.

Reviewer: I _think_ this is a bit out of place as an implementation detail. Could be convinced otherwise
```suggestion
```

Author: Will remove, I had written this because I was going to try and avoid defining the `Subgraph` and instead say that the type's shape wasn't explicitly defined but it should be consumable by the standard library or something.

Ended up defining it anyway

A **subgraph** is a JSON object with the following fields, each described in detail below:

- `roots`
- `vertices`
- `edges`
- `depths`

#### <Hidden>Subgraph Structure</Hidden> Vertices

##### <Hidden>Subgraph Structure Vertices</Hidden> Vertex

A `Vertex` is a JSON object which satisfies the following schema:

```json
{
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "kind": {
      "oneOf": ["entity"]
    },
    "inner": {
      "$comment": "the entity",
      "type": "object"
    }
  },
  "required": ["kind", "inner"]
}
```

> **Note**: The `kind` field is used to allow for future expansion of the subgraph format to include other kinds of vertices, such as ontology types.

##### <Hidden>Subgraph Structure Vertices</Hidden> The `Vertices` object

The `vertices` field of a **subgraph** is a JSON object where:

- the keys are `entityId`s
- the values are a JSON object where:
  - the keys are `revisionId`s - a unique identifier for an instance of a specific **entity** within a subgraph, and MUST be a string. This is a forward-facing field which currently doesn't serve a functional purpose and as such can be any string.
  - the values are `Vertex` objects

> > **Note**: The `revisionId` will be used to identify different revisions of the same element within a single subgraph, this could be multiple versions of the same ontology type, or multiple revisions of an entity in a datastore that supports versioning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note**: The `revisionId` will be used to identify different revisions of the same element within a single subgraph. This could be multiple versions of the same ontology type, or multiple revisions of an entity in an application that supports versioning.
```

#### <Hidden>Subgraph Structure</Hidden> Roots

The **roots** of a subgraph are distinguished elements which were the starting points for traversal of **edges** (up to depths defined by the **graph resolve depths**).

> The `roots` _field_ of the subgraph is an array of **Vertex IDs** which identify the roots, and are JSON objects which satisfies the following schema:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `roots` _field_ of the subgraph is an array of **Vertex IDs** which identify the roots, and are JSON objects which satisfy the following schema:
```

```json
{
  "type": "object",
  "properties": {
    "baseId": {
      "type": "string"
    },
    "revisionId": {
      "type": "string"
    }
  },
  "required": ["baseId", "revisionId"]
}
```

The `baseId` field MUST correspond to the key of the `vertices` object which is the parent of the object that contains the vertex of the root.
The `revisionId` field MUST correspond to the key of the object of `vertices[baseId]` which contains the vertex of the root.

> That is to say, `subgraph.vertices[baseId][revisionId]` MUST be the vertex of the root.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That is to say, `subgraph.vertices[baseId][revisionId]` MUST be the vertex of the root in question.
```

The **values** are all sent from the embedding application to the block on initialization, and re-sent subsequently if they change. They are:

> - `blockEntitySubgraph`: the subgraph rooted at the block entity, resolved to a depth determined by the embedding application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `blockEntitySubgraph`: the subgraph rooted at the block entity, resolved to a depth determined by the embedding application and reported in the `depths` field of the subgraph
```
